Science built America's power. From the
lightning rod to the atom bomb to
landing on the moon. Here's the
question. In a time of pandemics, AI,
and climate change, how do we make
American science better?
To find out, we asked three people who
study science itself. To understand
where American science is going, we have
to understand its eras and the pivot
that changed everything.
The first era of American science, I
would say, really stretches from the
founding of the country all the way
through the late 1800s. This is Ben
Reinhardt, founder of Speculative
Technologies, a materials and
manufacturing research organization. To
a large extent, this era is
characterized by largely tinkering.
Scientifically, in the discovering
knowledge sense, America is very much a
backwater. We have a lot of inventors,
not a lot of theory, just a lot of like
hands-on practical like, okay, how do we
make this steam engine better?
>> This is Dr. Caitlin Okconor, philosopher
of science at UC Irvine.
>> I mean, yeah, there was a huge change
pre and post World War II. I mean, one
of the biggest things that World War II
did for American science was start this
expectation that science is going to be
very, very heavily funded by the
government and that the government is
going to be putting all this money into
science and then also expecting that
they're going to be all of these
benefits for technology, especially
military technology, technologies that
make a country a dominant world power.
PreWorld War II, it relied a lot more on
private patronage.
>> This is Tom Khalil. He served in the
White House for both Clinton and Obama
administrations, where he designed and
launched dozens of White House science
and technology initiatives to support
innovation. Now he's the CEO of
Renaissance Philanthropy, a firm that
supports philanthropists and foundations
in developing and implementing
strategies to foster science in
innovation. So individual
philanthropists supporting science and
then because of the role that you know
physics in particular played in winning
the war there was a sense that the
federal government should keep
investing. That shift from private
philanthropy to government support
didn't just fund projects. It reshaped
how science itself was done in America.
What has American science contributed to
the world? Well, let's take a look in
the textbooks. Benjamin Franklin and
electricity, Thomas Edison and the light
bulb, Vanavar Bush and the development
of modern computing and information
technology. This was written about
Benjamin Franklin's famous kite and key
experiment when he was experimenting
with electricity. As soon as any of the
thunderclouds come over the kite, the
pointed wire will draw the electric fire
from them and the kite with all the
twine will be electrified and the loose
filaments of the twine will stand out
every way and be attracted by an
approaching finger. When the rain has
wet the kite and twine so that it can
conduct the electric fire freely, you
will find it stream out plentifully from
the key on the approach of your knuckle.
This was written about Thomas Edison. He
and his team tested thousands of
materials to find a filament that could
glow for hours without burning out.
Notwithstanding the enormous amount of
thought and labor expended on the
incandescent lamp problem from the
autumn of 1878 to the winter of 1879, it
must not be supposed for one moment that
Edison's whole endeavor and entire
incentive scale have been given to the
lamp alone or the dynamo alone. And this
is about one of the most underrated
figures in American science, Vanavar
Bush. Consider a future device for
individual use which is a sort of
mechanized private file and library. It
needs a name and to one at random mech
will do. A MEX device in which an
individual stores all his books,
records, and communications in which is
mechanized that it can be consulted with
exceeding speed and flexibility. It is
an enlarged intimate supplement to his
memory. Each in their time embodied the
same spirit. Experiment first, argue
later. But was that uniquely American or
just human?
Guilded Age science, which lasts until
1945. There's postw World War II science
and then market university science that
starts somewhere around 1980.
>> Three eras, one question. What makes the
American version special, if it is at
all?
>> Science is always so interconnected. You
know, there's so much communication
between scientists all over the world. I
have never thought about science as all
that divided among countries, especially
modern science because there is so much
communication between scientists.
Science is inherently global. But can
the argument be made that American
science is its own thing? Science is a
quest for discovery for like creating
new knowledge. I then draw the line
somewhere around this idea of
falsifiability. Like at the end of the
day, can you be wrong? Our culture has
hustle. Americans have hustle. People
come to America to do science because of
the freedoms we afford to scientists. No
regime can dictate what you can or can't
study. No mandate that every discovery
serves the state or the military. It's
one of the few places where science can
flourish for its own sake. But that may
be changing. There are proposed deep
cuts to our core science agencies. Like
so the US is making it more difficult
for smart people from around the world
who want to come to our universities and
then stay here to be able to do that. I
mean I think that is our superpower.
When you have a system that's predicated
on a really high rate of growth that all
of a sudden runs into steady funding
levels for science, it becomes hyper
competitive. To a large extent, that
system also was predicated on the
existence of corporate research labs
which have now been gutted. Anything
that I would call like pre-commercial,
we expect universities to do basically.
And then everything early and
postcommercial, we expect academics to
do. To a large extent, that's it.
Professors don't spend most of their
time doing science. They spend most of
their time managing grad students and
writing grants and serving on committees
and teaching and really don't get to do
very much science. And if like
professors don't get to do science, then
who does? Funding and access to global
talent are vital for American science.
When those two elements become
unavailable, the entire ecosystem of
doing science in America has to adapt in
some way. American science has always
advanced because of builders who dared
to imagine more. And the sponsor of this
video, E1 Ventures, is carrying that
spirit forward today. They partner with
founders working at the edge of what's
possible in areas like energy, AI, and
robotics. Their mission is simple.
Champion innovation that isn't just
about progress, but also purpose. If
you're building something bold and
looking for investors dedicated to
backing your vision and journey, reach
out to E1 today. With that in mind,
let's return to the story of how
American science has shaped the world
and how it's falling short today.
Wealthy Italian families supported the
Italian Renaissance by backing
Michelangelo and Da Vinci. Today's
philanthropist could be supporting a
21st century Renaissance. We work with
over 30 different philanthropists on
science moonshots that are organized as
focused research organizations that have
goals like lowering the cost of single
cell proteomics by a factor of 100,
lower the cost of mapping the brain by a
factor of 100, develop the tools that we
need for oceanbased carbon dioxide
removal. Philanthropists have a lot of
flexibility in terms of how they support
science and technology. that they could
invest but with a longer time horizon.
They could build coalitions for problems
that can't be solved by a single
individual organization and they can
advocate for policy change. Philanthropy
has the potential to be an enormous help
to address problems that don't yet have
an established agency dedicated to the
cause like NASA, the NIH or the DOE.
However, it's just one of many possible
solutions to address the gap. You have
to say what is the goal that I am trying
to achieve. The private sector is going
to underinvest in fundamental science.
Imagine that you were an entrepreneur
and you went to a VC and said, "Would
you give me, you know, $5 million seed
round? I'd like to understand why
jellyfish glow in the dark." That would
be a very short meeting.
If you held up the iPhone and you said,
"Where did the advanced transistor
design come from? Where did GPS come
from? Where did TCPIP come from?" All
those came from government funded
research and then entrepreneurs and
designers then took all the building
blocks and turned it into a worldass
product.
>> My big hypothesis is that there is no
one silver bullet. I really think that
we need to enable what I call
institutional pluralism and then relax
cultural expectations and a lot of the
things that sort of help the
universities maintain institutional
monopolies on these different roles and
give them competition like make it easy
for people to peel off different pieces
and then that's how I I think that like
naturally universities will feel
pressure to retrench to the core things
that they're good at.
Scientists were allowed to be
visionaries, even mad men. You could
dream big about what a transistor or a
new field might become. Today, that kind
of ambition gets you branded as an
extremist and pushed out of academia
entirely. We've told scientists to stop
dreaming, just turn out the data,
leaving the bold visions to Silicon
Valley. And when someone does reach too
far, like Eric Drexler with
nanotechnology or even Fineman in his
time, they're dismissed instead of
celebrated as pioneers with a bold
vision for the future. But we can change
that.
>> I tend to be kind of a science optimist.
I think for the most part, American
science has been going quite well.
People are coming from all around the
world to be educated in the US to work
in scientific labs. Science has been
self-correcting. It looks at itself. It
finds out what things are going wrong.
It tries to fix those things. The
meta-cience movement is part of the
self-correction of science.
>> Long before formal institutions existed,
American science was driven by curious
experimenters, freaks in the best sense
of the word, who tested, tinkered, and
dreamed. Of course, America isn't the
only country that's had a burst of
worldchanging science. History is full
of these hot spots in innovation. The
Egyptians developing math, the Chinese
experimenting with early chemistry and
alchemy, the Italians of the Renaissance
pushing physics and astronomy. Even
Tommy, Capernicus, Newton, each of them
tied to a cultural moment where science
took a leap forward. So when we talk
about American science, we're putting it
in the same lineage, not as the only
golden age, but as one of several times
in history when a country's curiosity
reshaped the bounds of humanity.
American science didn't start in a lab.
It started with curiosity that scaled
thanks to the systems bold enough to let
it grow. Today, we've hit the limits of
an old framework of scientific
innovation. But that's not the end of
the story. We don't have one neat answer
for how to fix American science. But
it's a problem worth solving because
curiosity built this country's science
once. And if we dare to reimagine how we
teach and how we build, then the next
great era of science will be ours to
build.
Thank you for watching this video. Let
us know what you think in the comments
below. Do you think American science is
a thing or is it just America trying to
steal the glory of other people's work?
One thing is for sure in my mind, and
it's that science is at a crossroads in
America. It's a perilous time. Things
are getting defunded and scientists are
being stifled to do the work and
research that they think is truth. Thank
you again for watching this video and as
always until next time, keep on building
the future.